# Final Project

The climax of this course is its final project. The final project is your
opportunity to take your knowledge of programming out for a spin and develop
your very own piece of software. So long as your project draws upon this
course's lessons, the nature of your project is entirely up to you, albeit
subject to the staff's approval. You may implement your project in any
language(s) as long as the staff approves. You are welcome to utilize
infrastructure other than the CS50 Appliance, provided the staff ultimately
has access to any hardware and software that your project requires. All that
we ask is that you build something of interest to you, that you make something
useful, that you solve an actual problem, or that you somehow impact campus.
Strive to create something that outlives this course.

Inasmuch as software development is rarely a one-person effort, you are
allowed an opportunity to collaborate with one or two fellow students for this
final project. Needless to say, it is expected that every student in any such
group contribute equally to the design and implementation of that group’s
project. Moreover, it is expected that the scope of a two- or three-person
group's project be, respectively, twice or thrice that of a typical one-person
project. A one-person project, mind you, should entail more time and effort
than is required by each of the course's problem sets.

Extensions on the final project are not granted, except in cases of emergency.
Technical difficulties are not considered emergencies. Problem sets' late days
cannot be spent on the final project. Lateness of submissions is determined
down to the minute by submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven
minutes late is equivalent to not submitting at all.

## Pre‐Proposal 
 
* Intended to promote early thought, the pre‐proposal is your opportunity to
  bounce one or more ideas off of your teaching assistant. Quite simply, by this
  pre‐proposal’s deadline, send an email to your teaching fellow describing one
  or more ideas that you have for your final project.
  
  Short, casual emails are fine, but do explain the motivation behind
  each of your ideas (i.e., why it interests you). Treat this
  requirement as an opportunity for counsel. Certainly include any
  questions or concerns that you have in this email. 
   
  The subject line of your email should be **Pre-Proposal**. 

## Proposal
 
* The proposal is your opportunity to receive approval and counsel from your
  teaching fellow before you proceed to design. Submitting a proposal amounts to
  answering a few questions about your idea. Once you have a project in mind,
  create a text document with the following information and upload it using the
  submit tab:

  > your project’s title;
  > a sentence summarizing your project;
  > a bulleted list of features;
  > a bulleted list of any frameworks, languages, libraries, or other technologies with which you’ll implement your project;
  > mockups of the screens a user might encounter, and the way these are linked together;
   
  We will either approve your proposal or require modifications on your part
  for subsequent approval. Your proposal, even if approved, is not binding; you
  may alter your plan at any point, provided you obtain the staff’s approval
  for any modifications. Projects submitted without approval may not receive
  credit. 

## Implementation 
   
* Ultimately due are implementation and documentation of your final project.
  Your submission thereof must include all of the below. 
   
  1. Documentation for your project in the form of a file called
     `documentation.html`, `documentation.pdf` or `README.txt`. This
     documentation is to be a user’s manual for your project. Though the
     structure of your documentation is entirely up to you, it should be
     incredibly clear to the staff how and where, if applicable, to compile,
     configure, and use your project. Your documentation should be at least
     several paragraphs in length, if not several pages.

  2. A “design document” for your project in the form of a file called
     `design.html`, `design.pdf`, design.txt that discusses, technically, how
     you implemented your project and why you made the design decisions you
     did. Your design document should be at least several paragraphs in length,
     if not several pages. Whereas your documentation is meant to be a user’s
     manual, consider your design document your opportunity to give the staff a
     technical tour of your project underneath its hood. 

  3. Any and all files required to compile and execute your software, including
     source code as well as, if applicable, configuration files, Makefiles,
     sample inputs, and so forth. Needless to say, all source code should be
     thoroughly commented. If your project uses a MySQL database, be sure to
     export it to a file (e.g., project.sql), as with phpMyAdmin’s Export tab,
     and include that file in the directory that you submit. 

  If you have met all these requirements, please submit your final project
  using the submit tab.

