![CS50 @ Minor Programmeren](cs50.png)

*Edition: February 2013*

CS50 is an introduction to the intellectual enterprises of computer science
and the art of programming. This course teaches students how to think
algorithmically and solve problems efficiently. Topics include abstraction,
algorithms, encapsulation, data structures, databases, memory management,
security, software development, virtualization, and websites. Languages
include C, PHP, and JavaScript plus SQL, CSS, and HTML. Problem sets inspired
by real-world domains of biology, cryptography, finance, forensics, and
gaming. Designed for concentrators and non-concentrators alike, with or
without prior programming experience.

## Staff

To contact the course's staff about almost anything, feel free to e-mail
<help@mprog.nl>. We'll usually respond within 24 hours.

### Course coordinator

Martijn Stegeman  
<stegeman@uva.nl>  
room: C3.204  
phone: 525 5235

### Course maintainer

Marin van Beek  
<m.vanbeek@uva.nl>

## Grading

You will receive a final grade for the course if:

* you've attended all lab sessions during the course;
* you've submitted every problem set working and on time;
* you've passed the quizzes.

Should you not have succeeded in doing one of those, we cannot give you a
final grade. Still, we are most certain that every student should be able to
pass the course!

Problem sets and the final project will be evaluated along axes of:

* Scope, 
* Correctness, 
* Design and 
* Style.

Know that CS50 draws quite the spectrum of students, including *those less
comfortable*, *those more comfortable*, and those somewhere in between.
However, what ultimately matters in this course is not so much where you end
up relative to your classmates but where you end up relative to yourself
before you took this course.

The course is *not* graded on a curve. The course does *not* have
pre-determined cutoffs for final grades. Those less comfortable and somewhere
in between are *not at a disadvantage* vis-à-vis those more comfortable. Each
student's final grade is individually determined at term’s end after input
from the assistants. Remarkable effort and upward trending do not go
unnoticed.

### Part 1

This part is composed of the problem sets 0 through 4 and a written test. The
final grade is determined by a weighed average of all these problem sets. The
test has to be passed, but is not weighed in your final grade.

- **Problem Sets 0-4**: 100%

### Part 2

This part is composed of the problem sets 5 through 7, a final project and a
written test. The final grade is determined by a weighed average of the
problem sets 5 through 8, which count for 60% of your final grade, and the
final project, which counts for 40% of your final grade. You have to pass the
test, but is not weighed in your final grade.

- **Problem Sets 5-7**: 60%
- **Final Project**: 40%



<!--
    # Lectures

    A schedule of lectures, subject to change, appears below.

    **Week 0**

    Introduction. Bits. Binary. ASCII. Programming. Algorithms. Scratch. Statements. Boolean expressions. Conditions. Loops. Variables. Threads. Events.

    **Week 1**

    C. Source code. Compilers. Object code. GCC. Functions. Comments. Standard output. Arithmetic operators. Precedence. Local variables. Types. Casting. Standard input. Libraries. Boolean expressions, continued. Conditions, continued. Loops, continued.

    **Week 2**

    Functions, continued. Global variables. Parameters. Return values. Stack. Frames. Scope. Arrays. Strings. Command-line arguments. Cryptography.

    **Week 3**

    Linear search. Binary search. Asymptotic notation. Recursion. Bubble sort. Selection sort. Debugging.

    **Week 4**

    Merge sort. Structures. Dynamic memory allocation. Pointers. Debugging, continued.

    **Week 5**

    CS50 Library. Heap. Pointers, continued. Forensics.

    **Week 6**

    Quiz 0 on Wed 21-mrt.

    **Week 7**

    File I/O. Linked lists. Stacks. Queues. Valgrind. Hash tables. Trees. Binary search trees. Tries.

    **Week 8**

    HTTP. HTML. CSS. PHP.

    **Week 9**

    PHP, continued. SQL.

    **Week 10**

    JavaScript. Ajax. APIs.

    **Week 11**

    Life after 50.

    *Quiz 1 on Wed 9-mei.*

    **Week 12**

    Exciting conclusion.

    # Sections

    Lectures are supplemented by weekly, 90-minute sections led by the teaching fellows. Sections provide you with opportunities to explore and discuss course materials in a more intimate environment, with only your teaching fellow and a handful of classmates present, as well as to dive into hands-on activities.

    Different sections are offered for those less comfortable, those more comfortable, and those somewhere in between.

    Sectioning begins in Week 1. Sections themselves begin in Week 3, with course-wide supersections (open to all students) offered in Week 2.

    # Walkthroughs

    On Sunday nights from 7:00pm until 8:30pm, the teaching fellows hold a "walkthrough" for the current week’s problem set during which you receive direction on where to begin and how to approach the week's challenges.
    Each walkthrough is filmed and made available within 24 hours in streaming and downloadable formats (MP3 and MP4). You are expected to attend or watch walkthroughs before asking questions about problem sets.

    # Problem Sets

    Nine problem sets are assigned during the semester. Each is due via electronic submission six or more days after its date of distribution. However, you have four "late days" that you may "spend" during the semester, each of which provides you with an extension of twenty-four hours. You may spend no more than one late day on any particular problem set. You need not inform the staff of your use of a late day; usage of late days is tracked automatically. Lateness of electronic submissions is determined down to the minute by submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven minutes late is equivalent to submitting twenty-four hours late. Late work is not accepted once you have exhausted your late days, except in cases of emergency. Technical difficulties are not considered emergencies. These late days cannot be spent on the course’s final project.

    In order to accommodate students with different backgrounds, some problem sets are released in two editions: a standard edition intended for most students and a “Hacker Edition” intended for some students. Both editions essentially cover the same material. But the Hacker Edition typically presents that material from a more technical angle and poses more sophisticated questions. Hacker Editions are graded separately from standard editions, but those students who submit the former do not receive any form of extra credit outright. When determining grades at term’s end, however, we do bear in mind submissions of Hacker Editions.

    To be clear, we encourage most students (including aspiring computer scientists) to tackle the standard editions. However, you may choose, week to week, which edition to submit. You may not submit both or some amalgam of the two.

    Although you must submit all nine problem sets, your lowest score among those problem sets on which you received a score of perfection for the axis of scope will be dropped when final grades are determined.

    A schedule of problem sets, subject to change, appears below.

    **Problem Set 0: Scratch**  
    due by noon on Thu 16-feb

    **Problem Set 1: C**  
    due by noon on Thu 23-feb

    **Problem Set 2: Crypto**  
    due by noon on Thu 1-mrt

    **Problem Set 3: The Game of Fifteen**  
    due by noon on Thu 8-mrt

    **Problem Set 4: ??**  
    due by noon on Thu 15-mrt

    **Problem Set 5: Forensics**  
    due by noon on Thu 5-apr

    **Problem Set 6: Mispellings**  
    due by noon on Thu 12-apr

    **Problem Set 7: C$50 Finance**  
    due by noon on Thu 19-apr

    **Problem Set 8: CS50 Shuttle**  
    due by noon on Thu 26-apr

    # Quizzes

    The course has two 75-minute quizzes. These quizzes are "closed-book," but you may utilize during each quiz one two-sided page (A4) of notes, typed or written, and a pen or pencil, nothing else.

    When final grades are computed, your scores on these two quizzes are weighted equally.

    A schedule of quizzes, subject to change, appears below; these quizzes take place in lieu of lectures on these dates.

    > **Quiz 0**  
    > Wed 21-mrt
    > 
    > Covers weeks 0 through 5.
    > 
    > **Quiz 1**  
    > Wed 9-mei
    > 
    > Covers weeks 0 through 10 with emphasis on 7 onward.

    Unless arranged with the staff in advance, quizzes may not be taken at alternative times even if missed by accident, except in cases of emergency.

    # Final Project

    The climax of this course is its final project. The final project is your opportunity to take your knowledge of programming out for a spin and develop your very own piece of software. So long as your project draws upon this course’s lessons, the nature of your project is entirely up to you, albeit subject to the staff’s approval. You may implement your project in any language(s) as long as the staff approves. You are welcome to utilize infrastructure other than the CS50 Appliance and cloud.cs50.net, provided the staff ultimately has access to any hardware and software that your project requires. All that we ask is that you build something of interest to you, that you make something useful, that you solve an actual problem, or that you somehow impact campus. Strive to create something that outlives this course.

    Inasmuch as software development is rarely a one-person effort, you are allowed an opportunity to collaborate with one or two fellow students for this final project. Needless to say, it is expected that every student in any such group contribute equally to the design and implementation of that group’s project. Moreover, it is expected that the scope of a two- or three-person group's project be, respectively, twice or thrice that of a typical one-person project. A one-person project, mind you, should entail more time and effort than is required by each of the course’s problem sets.

    Guidelines for the final project will be distributed by Mon 10/24. A schedule, subject to change, appears below.

    **Pre-Proposal**  
    due by noon on Mon 23-apr

    **Proposal**  
    due by noon on Mon 27-apr

    **Status Report**  
    due by noon on Mon 21-mei

    **Implementation**  
    due by noon on Thu 24-mei

    Extensions on the final project are not granted, except in cases of emergency. Technical difficulties are not considered emergencies. Problem sets' late days cannot be spent on the final project. Lateness of submissions is determined down to the minute by submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven minutes late is equivalent to not submitting at all.
-->

## Academic Honesty

For more information on the UvA-specific rules, see: [Fraude, plagiaat en bronvermelding](http://studentenserviceplein.uva.nl/serviceplein/content/fraude-plagiaat-en-bronvermelding/fraude-en-plagiaatregeling.html) or: [Plagiarism and fraud](http://studentenserviceplein.uva.nl/en/service-point/content/plagiarism-and-fraud/plagiarism-and-fraud.html)

## Books

No books are required for this course. However, we do have a number of books
available for you to read during office hours. You are welcome to pick up one
of these and read them as a preparation for or review of one of the lectures.
