# Course components



Problem sets and the final project will be evaluated along the following axes:

* Scope, 
* Correctness, 
* Design and 
* Style.




## Course contents

### Lectures

These discuss all theory that is needed to pass the quizzes.

### Sections

Lectures are supplemented by weekly, 90-minute sections led by the Harvard
teaching fellows. Sections provide you with opportunities to explore and
discuss course materials in a more intimate environment.

### Walkthroughs

These discuss the current week's problem set. This is where you receive
direction on where to begin and how to approach the week's challenges.

### Problem Sets

The eight problem sets are the hard work of the course. You are supposed to
work on them in the lab most of the time, where you can ask questions to the
teaching assistants.

You have four "late days" that you may "spend" during the semester, each of
which provides you with an extension of twenty-four hours. You may spend no
more than one late day on any particular problem set. You need not inform the
staff of your use of a late day; usage of late days is tracked automatically.
Lateness of electronic submissions is determined down to the minute by
submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven minutes late is equivalent
to submitting twenty-four hours late. Late work is not accepted once you have
exhausted your late days, except in cases of emergency. Technical difficulties
are not considered emergencies. These late days cannot be spent on the
course's final project.

In order to accommodate students with different backgrounds, some problem sets
are released in two editions: a standard edition intended for most students
and a "Hacker Edition" intended for some students. Both editions essentially
cover the same material. But the Hacker Edition typically presents that
material from a more technical angle and poses more sophisticated questions.
Hacker Editions are graded separately from standard editions, but those
students who submit the former do not receive any form of extra credit
outright.

To be clear, we encourage most students (including aspiring computer
scientists) to tackle the standard editions. However, you may choose, week to
week, which edition to submit. You may not submit both or some amalgam of the
two.

### Quizzes

The course has two 2-hour quizzes. These quizzes are "closed-book," but you
may utilize during each quiz one two-sided page (A4) of notes, typed or
written, and a pen or pencil, nothing else.

### Final Project

The climax of this course is its final project. The final project is your
opportunity to take your knowledge of programming out for a spin and develop
your very own piece of software. So long as your project draws upon this
course's lessons, the nature of your project is entirely up to you, albeit
subject to the staff's approval. You may implement your project in any
language(s) as long as the staff approves. You are welcome to utilize
infrastructure other than the CS50 Appliance, provided the staff ultimately
has access to any hardware and software that your project requires. All that
we ask is that you build something of interest to you, that you make something
useful, that you solve an actual problem, or that you somehow impact campus.
Strive to create something that outlives this course.

Inasmuch as software development is rarely a one-person effort, you are
allowed an opportunity to collaborate with one or two fellow students for this
final project. Needless to say, it is expected that every student in any such
group contribute equally to the design and implementation of that groupâ€™s
project. Moreover, it is expected that the scope of a two- or three-person
group's project be, respectively, twice or thrice that of a typical one-person
project. A one-person project, mind you, should entail more time and effort
than is required by each of the course's problem sets.

Extensions on the final project are not granted, except in cases of emergency.
Technical difficulties are not considered emergencies. Problem sets' late days
cannot be spent on the final project. Lateness of submissions is determined
down to the minute by submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven
minutes late is equivalent to not submitting at all.





# How to ace this course #

You're on your own through this course most of the time, though we will be,
quite literally, on your side when you're in the labs.

Make good use of the various materials that are in the course. Here's a guided
tour through the important parts.

## Lecture notes

Start by reading the lecture notes. These can be found on the page of that
specific lecture. These give you a good indication of what you should know to
finish a problem set.

## Lectures

Now you can watch the lecture. Do this before or on your way to the lab
sessions (so not *during* the lab sessions), in order to be able to spend your
lab time programming and asking good questions about the problem sets.

## Problem sets

Read the problem set specification completely and try to work out by hand,
with pen and paper, what tasks your program should perform, *before*
you start writing code.

## Sections

If you haven't fully grasped the lecture, the sections of the following week
are a more in depth discussion of some of the best stuff discussed in that
lecture. The sections also provide some extra examples that may help you get
started on your problem set.

## Walkthrough

If after all of this you are still unsure where to start with your problem
set, you can watch the walkthrough. You can find the walkthroughs on the
problem set pages.

## Hacker Edition

If the assignment was a breeze, we would love you to do the hacker edition of
the assignment. This is quite a bit more difficult, and a great challenge for
those *more comfortable*.

## Test preparation

To prepare for the tests, you should regularly re-read the lecture notes and
ask the assistants to help you if anything is unclear, like those darn
*pointers*.
